Hello everyone
In this video let us have an introduction to bubble
sort
So bubble sort is a very simple sorting algorithm and
it is similar to the movement of an air bubble
that raises up in the water
That is the larger bubble will rise first and the
smaller once will follow it
Likewise in bubble sort each iteration the largest or smaller
element will get to its actual place
Here we have five bubbles each of different size
As we said the largest bubble will rise first
And what bubble suit actually does is it will continuously
compare adjacent bubbles
And if the first bubble is larger than second it
is swapped
So here we have first bubble larger than the second
bubble
So both are swapped now
The second bubble is larger than the third bubble again
we need to swap now
The third bubble is larger than the fourth bubble
So again swap that and see the fourth bubble is now
larger than the fifth one
So again swap these bubbles and now the largest bubble
has reached the last position and it will rise now
Now repeat the same process
Compare 1st and 2nd bubbles which one is larger Here
it is the second one
So there is no issue so we can compare 2nd
and 3rd bubbles
The second one is larger here so swap them now
compared third and fourth bubbles which is larger
It is the fourth bubble so no need to swap
And now we have the largest bubble at the last
position and it will rise now again Repeat the process
So here we have first bubble larger than the second
bubble
So both are swapped so we can compare the 2nd
and 3rd bubbles and which is larger
Here it is the third one
So again there is no need to swap
And now the largest bubble will rise again
Compare 1st and 2nd bubbles which is larger here it
is the second one
So there is no issue and it will rise now
and now there is only one bubble left and it
will raise now
So this is what bubble sort is
In each cycle of comparison the largest bubble gets into
last position and it will rise
So now let us see how it works
With an array we have an array of size five
with elements 50 25 5
and ten First take the first pair
That is index zero and one
The elements are 50 and 25 is in the right
order
No
25 is less than 50
So 25 should come 1st and 50 should come after
it
so swap and the next pair is 50 and
five again It is in the wrong order so
Swap
Take then next pair
Now we have 15 and 20 again
It is in the wrong order
So Swap Next is 50 and 10 against it is wrong
order So swap
And we got 50 the largest element at the last
position
Now the next cycle begins compared the first two elements
25 5 and five is less than 25
So it is not the right position
So swap Next we have 25 20 and 20 is
less than 25 again swap
Next we have 25 10 and 10 is less than
So again perform swap now The largest element in these four
elements came to the fourth position
So this is what happens in each step
The nth largest element will come to end position
Hence one element is being sorted that is brought to
correct position in each step in next step compare five
and 20 and five is less than 20 and there
is no issue with this placing
So do not swap and compare
The next pair which is 20 and 10 and 20
is greater than 10
So it is not right
So swap
So now the third largest element came to the third
position in next step compare five and 10
It is okay so do not swap and it is
done for its size five we needed four iterations that
is in fifth step
We will be left with one element only which will
be the smallest element and it will be in the
right position
So if the size of array is n we need n
minus one steps only
So to implement this we can use two Loops the
outer loop execute for size minus one times and the
inner loop will compare the adjacent elements and swap if
needed for index 0 0 and one will be compared for
index 1 1 and two will be compared for index two
two and three will be compared and for Index Three
three and four will be compared but in index four
we don't have an element at Index five so we
should run the loop until size minus one instead of
framing the loop till size
If we run the loop till J less than size it
will produce an unexpected result as Index five might have
some garbage value
We can also optimise the running time by analysing the
procedure
In the first iteration one element is sorted so we
can excluded in the next iteration
In the second iteration two elements are sorted so we
can exclude those two elements in the next iteration
And similarly in the third iteration three elements are sorter
So exclude those three elements in the next iteration so
each iteration an element is sorted so we can excluded in
the next iteration by placing size minus one minus I
It will optimise the running time even further and inside
this loop we need to compare the elements and if
it is not in the right order we have to
swap
So in this video we learnt what is bubble sort
and how it works
In the next video we will learn how the implementation works in detail.